---
title: Botch
date: 2023-03-24T01:02:49.058Z
draftDate: 2023-03-23T05:08:10.237Z
draft: drafts://open?uuid=E2ACA933-8CB4-4F51-9577-AD84F5E05BAD
github: https://github.com/pborenstein/pborenstein.com/blob/main/src/posts/e2aca933-8cb4-4f51-9577-ad84f5e05bad.md
newlines: true
permalink: "/posts/{{title|slugify|truncate(32,true, '')}}/"
---
--- what did you do before this?
--- I was a surgeon. 
--- No shit?
--- No shit.
--- So, how did you end you doing this
--- One day, I'm having lunch with one of my professors. Guy practically mentored me through med school. And you know, it's a lunch, catching up, how ya doing--- all that stuff. And I'm telling him about the baby, and about Susan being pregnant again, and how I'm not getting any sleep, and he says: Yes, I remember those days. Now babies don't wake me up at night. It's having to go to the bathroom three times a night that makes me lose sleep. So I say to him, You know, Giovanni --- his parents were Italian --- I can fix that. A quick surgery, and boom, problem solved. You sleep through the night.
--- And that's why you became a bartender?
--- He says: I've looked at the literature, and incontinence is not an unusual outcome. Like 30%. So I say to him, Gio, do you think I would let that happen to you?
--- Lemme guess. 
--- Yup. I did the surgery. Everything looked good for the first few weeks. A little post-surgical incontinence is to be expected. We used to joke about it during his weekly followups. "You know, Lane, if I'm still wetting the bed in October, I'm pulling your medical license."
--- So what happened?
--- He became incotinent.
--- Huh?
--- He couldn't control his peeing. 
--- Whoa! You broke his dick!
--- Pretty much. At first I was all "These things happen” and, y’know, “probability.” Those follow up appointments got harder and harder.
---  Whoa!
--- The worst part was when he said: I still pee at night, but at least I don’t need to get up. Then he said: The objective was to let the patient sleep through the night without waking up to urinate. And that’s where we are: I don’t wake up to urinate. In fact, I don’t even know when I’m urinating when I’m awake.
--- So?
--- So that’s when I lost it. 
--- Your confidence?
--- My confidence was the least of it. It just kept coming back to this man getting a good night’s sleep, and how I fucked it up. I never wanted to do anything like that again.
--- So you became a bartender?
---- What can I say? I’m still a sadist.
